README.md, before:

# AIDB

Has nothing to do with AI but the user interface looks like you are talking to a chatbot.

Try it out at [nk0.me/g/aidb](https://nk0.me/g/aidb), or run it locally with `cargo run -p aidb-cli` and connect to it with any MySQL-compatible client.

## Features

- [x] Schema storage
- [x] Integer, Real and Text datatypes
- [x] CREATE TABLE statement
- [x] Storage engine
- [x] Logical query plan and physical query plan
- [x] Query engine
- [x] INSERT INTO statement
- [x] SELECT statement
- [ ] UPDATE statement
- [ ] DELETE FROM statement
- [ ] B-Tree index
- [ ] Hash index
- [ ] Prefix index
- [ ] CREATE INDEX statement
- [ ] Transaction
- [ ] Write Ahead Journal
- [ ] START TRANSACTION and COMMIT statement
- [x] Fancy browser-only Web-UI
- [x] Mostly MySQL-compatible server
- [x] Absolutely 0% AI (except for the name)

## Info for nerds

Install Trunk, run `trunk serve` to bring up the dev server for the Web-UI.

There are four crates in this workspace:

- aidb (root): UI, which is the most important part of the project and hence the name
- aidb-core: database implementation
- aidb-cli: MySQL adaptor
- archive: save the entire storage backend into or load from a tar.lz4 archive

Storage backend uses Apache OpenDAL.

### Block layout

All data are stored in little endian.

There are 5 types of blocks: super block, schema block, data block, text block and index block

- Super block: see struct `SuperBlock` in `aidb-core/src/superblock.rs`
- Schema block: see struct `Schema` in `aidb-core/src/schema.rs`
- Data block: header see struct `DataHeader` in `aidb-core/src/data.rs`, row-first packed data storage, each row is stored as 1 byte columns count (non-positive means empty row) followed by packed values, order of columns is the same as table definition, columns are stored as a 1 byte type tag (0 - null, 1 - integer, 2 - real, 3 - text) followed by actual data:
  - Integer 8 bytes two's complement
  - Real 8 bytes IEEE 754
  - Texts 8 bytes length (in bytes) followed by either UTF-8 (if length is no greater than 8) or text block index (8 bytes)
- Text block: next text block index (8 bytes) followed by UTF-8
- Index block: b+ tree or hash index
  - B+ Tree: WIP
  - Hash: WIP


#### Info for lawyers

<sup>
Copyright &copy; 2025 NKID00
<br>
This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU Affero General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
<br>
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU Affero General Public License for more details.
<br>
You should have received a copy of the GNU Affero General Public License along with this program. If not, see &lt;<a href="https://www.gnu.org/licenses/" target="_blank">https://www.gnu.org/licenses/</a>&gt;.
</sup>

Commit message:

fix: btree insert logic & rollback if query failed

README.md, after:

# AIDB

Has nothing to do with AI but the user interface looks like you are talking to a chatbot.

Try it out at [nk0.me/g/aidb](https://nk0.me/g/aidb), or run it locally with `cargo run -p aidb-cli` and connect to it with any MySQL-compatible client.

## Features

- [x] Schema storage
- [x] Integer, Real and Text datatypes
- [x] CREATE TABLE statement
- [x] Storage engine
- [x] Logical query plan and physical query plan
- [x] Query engine
- [x] INSERT INTO statement
- [x] SELECT statement
- [ ] UPDATE statement
- [ ] DELETE FROM statement
- [x] B-Tree index
- [ ] EXPLAIN statement
- [x] Transaction
- [x] START TRANSACTION, COMMIT and ROLLBACK statement
- [x] auto rollback on query failure
- [x] Fancy browser-only Web-UI
- [x] Mostly MySQL-compatible server
- [x] Absolutely 0% AI (except for the name)

## Info for nerds

Install Trunk, run `trunk serve` to bring up the dev server for the Web-UI.

There are four crates in this workspace:

- aidb (root): UI, which is the most important part of the project and hence the name
- aidb-core: database implementation
- aidb-cli: MySQL adaptor
- archive: save the entire storage backend into or load from a tar.lz4 archive

Storage backend uses Apache OpenDAL.

### Block layout

All data are stored in little endian.

There are 5 types of blocks: super block, schema block, data block, text block and index block

- Super block: see struct `SuperBlock` in `aidb-core/src/superblock.rs`
- Schema block: see struct `Schema` in `aidb-core/src/schema.rs`
- Data block: header see struct `DataHeader` in `aidb-core/src/data.rs`, row-first packed data storage, each row is stored as 1 byte columns count (non-positive means empty row) followed by packed values, order of columns is the same as table definition, columns are stored as a 1 byte type tag (0 - null, 1 - integer, 2 - real, 3 - text) followed by actual data:
  - Integer 8 bytes two's complement
  - Real 8 bytes IEEE 754
  - Texts 8 bytes length (in bytes) followed by either UTF-8 (if length is no greater than 8) or text block index (8 bytes)
- Text block: next text block index (8 bytes) followed by UTF-8
- Index block: b+ tree or hash index
  - B+ Tree: WIP
  - Hash: WIP


#### Info for lawyers

<sup>
Copyright &copy; 2025 NKID00
<br>
This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU Affero General Public License as published by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any later version.
<br>
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU Affero General Public License for more details.
<br>
You should have received a copy of the GNU Affero General Public License along with this program. If not, see &lt;<a href="https://www.gnu.org/licenses/" target="_blank">https://www.gnu.org/licenses/</a>&gt;.
</sup>
